foreign there's no way of getting it
right there's no complete there's no
finish line there's no done there's no
I'm gonna get it there is just what's
the next experiment what's the next
adventure what can I learn from what
just happened there's just play
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
today we're going to talk about
everything you need to know about
embarking on a personal transformative
Journey conditions for transformation
what happens on the journey what we can
get excited about and what we'll get in
our way
so Joe tell me what does someone need to
know about embarking on a transformative
Journey there's kind of a way to look at
it that we can dissect it into the all
the parts of it and let's do that but
before I even start there the most
important thing that someone should know
about deciding like hey I want to do
something that transforms my life is
that it's a process to be enjoyed like
and not only is it a process to be
enjoyed because that's nice but it's
because it's more effective
and the only thing to tweak about that
is that enjoying yourself is a little
bit different than maybe how you're
thinking of it so most people think or a
lot of people think if someone says hey
go enjoy yourself they think what am I
going to do you know like I I'll go play
golf or I'll go and have a conversation
with a friend or I'll go get high on
heroin whatever their idea of enjoying
themselves is that's not what I'm
speaking to what I'm speaking to is
how do you allow yourself more enjoyment
in everything that you're doing
so that's what I mean by enjoy
yourselves if it means that you're in a
SAT song listening to a guru how do you
enjoy yourself in that
if it means that you are listening to
this digital recording even if you
notice that you're criticizing yourself
how do you enjoy criticizing yourself
that's the question the question isn't
how do I do the things that I enjoy the
question is how do I enjoy the things
that I'm doing that's like the golden
meme of the journey like that's where
you guide your footsteps by and then
everything else is kind of a
technicality that revolves around that
sun it's a it's like the gravitation
is how do you enjoy yourself
um right and as far as like the details
I think you can Clump them into like
four parts the one part is
um what are the conditions that need to
be set for transformation there's a
acupuncturist once taught me this this
idea of like conditions for healing it's
like what do you need to do just so that
somebody can potentially heal
um if you're treating them so there's
that conditions that need to be there
for transformation to be possible and
then there's a question of approach like
how do you approach it because at the
end of the day you're responsible
and your approach is going to make a big
difference in the alacrity the enjoyment
and the depth of transformation
and then I think you can also talk about
like what to expect on the journey
because when you really gotta get into
it there's certain things that happen
over and over again and that it can be
full they can kind of fool you and they
can also when you see them in a slightly
different light they can really Propel
you
and then I think then you can also talk
about like what gets in the way what are
the impediments of the journey so that's
how I would break it down so let's get
started then what are what are the
conditions that we would set in place
for us to enjoy our transformation the
first thing is I think the most
important thing is you need to feel safe
and safe is misused often in today's
world a lot of times people use safety
as a way to control like I don't feel
safe it's not actually a lack of safety
it's a way that they can control their
environment but you you have to feel
safe you can't fear reduces your
capacity to learn and so here's
something that you've never seen before
you've never seen two people in a
yelling match like one person going you
son of a papa and you mother Bubba Bubba
and the other person say oh yeah you
know you're right you've got a point
there it doesn't happen because it's
neurologically impossible so feeling
safe
is really critical to being able to
learn so that's important and it's
really important also to understand the
difference between
whether you feel unsafe or whether you
feel defensive
and there's a great trick to doing that
take a moment you know pause this or
whatever but feel in your body what it
feels like to feel unsafe when you
really felt like you were your life was
threatened or that you were threatened
and
then feel what it's like when you were
really defensive
and your body has two different signals
for that defensiveness and safety and
they they get confused sometimes so to
know the difference is really important
what are some examples of what that
might feel like in the body because I I
remember like early on going through
your courses a lot of the instruction of
like how does that feel in your body a
lot of times it would just be
dissociation I couldn't quite feel yeah
what do you mean in my body I'm thinking
this is a thought
um oftentimes safety is felt more
electrically in the body it's usually
um it can be felt in the shoulders
um and in the belly often but it's
different for everybody and it's really
based on whether you when you feel
unsafe if you go to
fight flight or
or freeze and that's so your body's
literally going to feel one of those
ways defense is usually a hardening it's
usually like a more increased rigidity
in some way so
tightening yeah but it doesn't always
have to be that so it's very different
for each person but those are some of
the signals to look for is like
how much electricity is moving through
what feels like electricity or energy is
moving through your body how rigid your
body is what part of your body lights up
these are the ways to know the
difference for you between safety and
resistance and then another thing that's
the condition needs to be said there
needs to be trust if you don't believe
that you are going to transform you are
at a severe disadvantage trusting a
teacher if you choose to have one
uh is really important trusting yourself
is so critical
so trust is a really important thing and
the belief that it's possible to really
know that that transformation is is
there there's this thing called the
placebo effect and the interesting thing
is that that's always seen like as a
glitch of science like you know we can't
really test it because some people just
think that they will get better and so
they do
in this work the placebo effect is is a
feature it's not a it's not a glitch
it's not a bug
it's really important that you think
that it's possible and I don't mean to
do it in a mamby pamby kind of way I'm
talking about like do the research do
what you have to do to find out that
it's possible
you know talk to people who've been in
the course or
know that that it's possible and the
truth is is like you know we have a
great success rate in our courses we've
had
you know great studies done and we have
a consistent shift that's measurable but
the main part is the belief that that's
possible and the other thing to see is
that some people don't change
occasionally you get someone who goes
through who doesn't change and one of
the things that you can always know
about that person is they never came in
with the confidence that they could
change
they were resistant right from the start
to the whole thing so if you're that
just don't do it it's a waste of your
time and it's a and it hurts the other
people that you're on the journey with
another really important thing is seeing
beyond your intellect and knowing that
your thoughts are only part of the way
the transformation happens that
like do your research if you need to to
know that like there are things like
mirror neurons and mirror neurons don't
register in the intellect of the brain
they're just some way in which we know
that our body has an intelligence that
if you move differently your thoughts
will be different you know research
things like sensory processing disorder
where they we know that kids who do not
get to inhabit their body in a full way
have a different brain function than
kids who have inhabited their body in a
full way who have an understanding of
where they are in space their
proprioception issues so we know that
the way that we move changes so our body
has an intelligence our emotions have an
intelligence our intellect happened
intelligence and if you are trying to do
all of your change through the intellect
you're going to be screwed
um it's going to be slow you're going to
be able to describe everything that's
wrong with you but very little is going
to have changed yeah I've experienced
that myself it took some time to realize
that like while I could logically create
a framework around everything that I was
experiencing I wasn't able to
actually transform until I let the
fuzzier logic of emotions and the body
uh make movements that I didn't have to
intellectually understand yeah yeah for
me the journey was similar it was like
a slightly different I just
deconstructed I spent like almost 10
years deconstructing all my thoughts so
that I could be free enough of them to
trust the other ways of knowing
and it's so apparent you know it's just
like ask somebody who's like a great
gymnast how they did it and they're not
going to give you an intellectual
explanation there's knowledge that
happens that isn't that the intellect
can't describe muscle memory is examples
like emotional memory
endocrine system has its own exact
memory hormone systems right exactly
nervous system all of that is very hard
to describe
another really important thing is
vulnerability
it's really hard to have a
transformational journey if you're like
yeah I got it it's cool I'm good yeah
it's not that bad I mean yeah there's
some something that could be done there
but
uh you know it's not that big of a deal
like if you're coming at it with that
approach
you are not going to have that much
transformation it doesn't mean that you
have to think there's something wrong
with me either right it doesn't mean
that you have to be like I'm broken fix
me you know I'm broken I have to fix
myself I need to be healed you don't
have to have that
I could create that entire model of
yourself and stay in that for years too
exactly but if you can't explore the
depths of your pain and your
constriction
and express it to other people
then you're not going to be able to
approach it you're not going to be able
to do anything about it you're not going
to be able to understand it better
you know it's like unless your attention
can go to the discomfort
then your system can't do anything about
the discomfort
and so a lot of people have learned how
to just not go to the discomfort and
obviously it builds up other things
happen it's a painful life but that's a
really important thing and I'd say
finally and I think I've stated it
before which is just
if you're not willing to take full
responsibility for your journey if you
start blaming a teacher if you start
blaming your wife if you start blaming
you know your mom and dad you know you
have to take full responsibility for the
journey
and it doesn't mean that you shame
yourself it doesn't mean that you blame
yourself but it just means you don't
shame or blame anybody else you have to
just say like I am exactly where I need
to be I am responsible for this that is
that is incredibly important in the
journey because every time you blame
somebody else for Where You Are
um including blaming yourself so anytime
you are blaming anything for where you
are you are slowing the process down
tremendously yeah it seems like each of
these is there's kind of a catch-22
because they're both conditions and also
the effects like for example with trust
many people might approach personal
development because starting with a
position of that they don't trust
themselves they don't trust their own
goodness or they don't trust teachers or
they don't trust the process and that's
something that they're working with so
what advice would you have for somebody
who wants to embark on a personal
Transformations Journey but is worried
about being manipulated or controlled by
a guru or right ending up in some you
know Backwater
yeah I would say maybe two or three
things that the first thing is like it's
back to the first principle right it's
enjoying yourself so if you are not
trusting somebody how do you enjoy that
movement of non-trust
it's clear that if you feel safe there's
a deeper level of enjoyment if you feel
trust there's a deeper enjoyment in
being vulnerable than there is in being
protected
you have any tips or exercises for
anybody who's embarking on this and
finding that they're having that
difficulty with say trust or
vulnerability some way to help them just
enjoy feeling what they're feeling
rather than trying to change it yeah
let's say you are in with a teacher and
you're not trusting them or you know
that you want to sign up for the course
but you know you're going to have trust
issues the best thing you can do is just
go to the person and say I don't trust
teachers and I want to
and how can we work together so that
this isn't a burden for you and this
isn't a burden for me that would be
taking responsibility being vulnerable
and trusting
um and even in saying that you're
trusting yourself which is the more
important thing than trusting the
teacher and in saying all this to a
teacher you're giving them trust in that
moment
and if they react in a way that's just
like well if you don't trust me
[__] you know then you pretty
much know it's not the right teacher or
if they go this is all about
just letting go into my words then you
know you don't have a great teacher
there and that maybe that you shouldn't
be trusting them yeah it's a good litmus
test the teachers should be able to
receive that that mistrust yeah should
be able to receive that mistrust
especially if you're taking ownership
and if and if you're not taking
ownership and they point to the
ownership then also a teacher worth
trusting
so that's that's an easy way to look at
it and yes you're right that to some
degree all of these things are they are
the things you're working on as well as
the things that you need to be
successful at it so then it's just an
order of operations thing it's like
make trust your first thing to work on
yeah like don't make your mommy issues
the first thing make trust the first
thing and it probably relates to your
mom issues or your dad issues but make
trust the first thing and really focus
there and another feature of this is
that it creates a positive feedback loop
you know like the safety Trust
and vulnerability and seeing beyond the
intellect may be the things that are
initially holding you back but then as
you work on them more and more the speed
of your development increases yeah
that's exactly right it becomes more
enjoyable which is you know the speed it
becomes far less important than the
enjoyment like if you enjoy your entire
developmental Journey deeply who who
cares how fast you're going and who
cares when you're going to get there you
start to get to the point where you feel
that restriction like like oh I'm
interviewing Joe I'm feeling restriction
now and then you're like oh good this is
something to work on yeah no I want to
go away yeah that's a beautiful pointing
that's that's a great way to think about
all of this stuff is like there is a
point in that path where everything
that's uncomfortable you trust you like
that uncomfortable thing approaches and
you're like oh
I can trust this thing because it's
going to teach me something I just have
to be vulnerable in it and take full
responsibility yeah beautiful so tell me
more tell me more about how to approach
this how to approach this we're setting
those conditions yeah and and the
spiritual path in general yeah
approaching the spiritual path
what I mean by that is like what's the
best way to be on the path right if
those are the conditions that you that
are important for you to just make sure
I'm met before you even like pack in
your bag like that's the tent and the
you know the food stores this is like
how do you walk down the path and that's
how when I say the approach to a path
that's what I mean it's like how do you
walk down it and how you walk down the
path is you know you know some of this
stuff because of our um the 18-month
course you did but it's I have it as the
five principles of how to how to be on
the path one is loving accountability
which basically means that you're honest
with who you are what you've done
without shame
it means that you
can apologize to somebody that you can
take an honest inventory of yourself
without shame that you can
look at yourself directly
and not feel like you have to be any
different that's loving accountability
and it's approaching life in that same
way it's it's asking those around you to
to meet you in that place so an example
of that would be you know to say to the
teacher I'm having trust issues and I
don't want to be having trust issues
it's kind of loving accountability to
say I have trust issues because that
might be making them responsible but
that full loving accountability is is
that I have trust issues and I don't
want to have them I want to be able to
trust life I want to be able to trust
people
that's full loving accountability
and then Embrace intensity is
it's not creating intensity which I
think some people mistake it for often
but it's it's embracing intensity it's
the you know it's a business Theory as
well it's like um being a great CEO one
of the biggest things about it is just
making sure the right amount of
attention from the organization is going
to the right parts of the organization
are we being attentive to our problems
are we being attentive to being
proactive are we being attentive to
our culture are we being attentive to
our customer like how how much attention
is going where
most intensity that's generally where
that attention needs to go correct
that's right like just like in the body
if there's pain it's that pain is
telling you hey this is where you pay
attention if you want to take care of
yourself pay attention to the pain
it's the same thing it's it's it but I
call it intensity because it's not all
pain because it can be pleasure often
what we avoid more than pain is pleasure
and people have a hard time seeing that
until they see it and then they're just
like oh
I got I always say it's subtle to you
see it and that moment when you actually
notice like oh I
it's more intense for me to be in deep
pleasure than it is for me to be in pain
that's a that's a moment so that's
embracing intensity the other principle
is everything is in iteration so it just
means that there's no way of getting it
right there's no complete there's no
finish line there's no done there's no
I'm gonna get it there is just what's
the next experiment what's the next
adventure how do I learn what can I
learn from what just happened there's no
blame there's no shame there's just play
there's just like let's do it this way
okay now let's do it this way and
there's just a trust that you're gonna
keep on entering and it's gonna keep on
getting better and
You're Gonna Learn and
there's no need to think of anything
that you've done is right or wrong and I
can hear the brains out there already
like going but if you kill somebody
that's wrong I would agree that killing
somebody is uh
is not how we want to behave but if
there is a person out there who who has
killed somebody and they're not going to
be caught that my hope for them would be
that their mindset is out of iteration
that their mindset is that of like okay
well that felt shitty in my body
and I feel horrible
and I'm still thinking about this thing
and my guilt is creeping up on me and
like my life
has gotten worse and it didn't make me
any happier and it didn't solve my
problems so let's do a different
iteration next time I have a problem
with somebody like that that's what I
would hope that they would do that
brings up a great point because a lot of
what happens in uh soldiers that come
back from war with PTSD a lot of the
PTSD isn't around what happened to them
personally but it's perhaps around the
fact that they killed somebody and they
did it in like anger or rage in the
intensity of the moment and that they
actually enjoyed it or something about
having done it makes them feel like a
monster and so they think that that's
just some core part of themselves that's
unchangeable and makes them bad and then
holding that core belief just causes so
much more suffering and pain in their
lives in the lives of those around them
that's exactly it it's just like we're
never finished
we're never where there's no moment of
perfection and we are reacting to an
environment and and we're iterating that
same person
never going to Iraq or Iran or wherever
people are fighting these days
um that same Soldier if they hadn't hit
that environment what like what would
they be thinking about their core selves
so it's a very iterative thing and I
think it's really important to have that
mindset and that change not only can
happen it's the only thing that you know
will happen so that's it I think being
curious is really important as well
that's the other way of approaching the
path that's really important is being
curious this is one of the most
enjoyable ones you know it's let's take
that person as an example who like feels
like Oh I'm a bad person because I
killed people like what if you're
curious about that what are the
questions that actually come up instead
of being knowing that you're a bad
person what would be the most curious
questions about it
how was that feeling that led me to take
that action yeah
what makes me not want to kill everybody
right now
if that's who I am what's making what's
stopping that in me right now
if that's who I am what's making me keep
on beating myself up over it like what's
the part of me that's beating myself up
over it if it's essentially who I am and
if it's essentially who I am like what
makes me not going to the grocery store
and kill a whole bunch of people so
there's just curiosity and it frees it
up because your fear and curiosity can't
exist at the same time like if you
imagine yourself running from a tiger
like really close your eyes for a moment
you're running from a tiger this tiger
is fast and it is hungry and you are
running and feel the fear coursing
through your system and you're moving as
quick as you can and it's catching up on
you and you can like
hear its breath and it's like oh you
know it's like it's gonna get you
and you can feel that fear in your
system and now wonder how much does the
tiger weigh
right the all the fear goes away you
can't operate from Fear if you're
curious
and it doesn't just operate like I can
be curious if I'm not scared it's why
safety is so important from earlier
right because if you you can't learn but
you can also just turn on curiosity and
it just reduces fear just like if you
turn on fear it reduces curiosity so
that's a cool one and then the last one
and I'd say the most important one is
connection that it's really important to
stay in connection and connection with
each other in connection with yourself
and connection with your body
it means being in contact with it's it's
like you were saying earlier that like
before when you were thinking about
emotions you're like well I don't know
how to work in my body all I have is
disassociation
a contact means literally like touching
it's just like to have that point of
contact can I just touch into the
emotion can I just touch in to the pain
can I just touch into you can I just
touch into
me
can I touch into that part of me that I
don't want to see can I touch into that
part of me I'm not proud of can I touch
into that part of me that is proud
it's connection it's it is what allows
the tree to evolve it's what allows us
to evolve is a connection tell me more
about how embracing intensity or being
curious about the lion that is about to
eat you
um
how is that enjoying yourself
and how does that help you get away from
the lion yeah that's a great question
well on the lion part obviously I'm not
suggesting that you should wonder how
much a lion plays or tiger ways if
they're chasing you
um our system isn't curious when we're
in fear for a reason
but if you are in fear over something
else like you know what color car you
should buy or if you're going to get
fired yeah being curious is far more
enjoyable than that and and being
curious about being fired is far more
enjoyable than worrying about being
fired so the curiosity is like you can
just feel that in your system like if
you just take a moment and you know you
can pause here and just
feel what it's like to know [__] to like
be like I know I know what you are I
know what I am and then to be curious
about who you are you can just feel
there's more enjoyment in the body
embracing intensity
is a little bit more complicated as far
as the enjoyment goes it's the Embrace
part of it that makes enjoyable like
intensity happens like you can't stop it
you know the Buddhists talk about it
they say
pain occurs suffering is the choice it's
the embracing of the pain that prevents
the suffering
and so the enjoyment is is embracing
something that you can't avoid or that
if you avoid it's less enjoyable right
like
meaning like if you're a heroin addict
you can avoid the detoxes you know you
can avoid withdrawals but it's not going
to make an enjoyable life
so at that moment you want to embrace
the intensity of the withdrawals part of
it is the embracing of it when it needs
to be done or when it's unavoidable or
when it's when it's just better to to
face the intensity than not which is
almost always you know sometimes we
create intensity which is not
necessary but if we're not creating it
in a conscious way then embracing it is
great in fact embracing intensity
is one of the great ways to stop
intensity from happening in our lives
yeah in a way you let it move through
you and change you and then you learn
the lesson in the intensity
exactly yeah that's exactly it so tell
me more about what happens on this
journey what are the what are some of
the pitfalls or some of the things that
might be surprisingly enjoyable
being on the journey the pitfalls are in
my mind are slightly different but the
the being on the journey is there's just
some things to know about it like so one
of the things to know about it is the
way human beings learn is a back and
forth nature it's a pendulation is the
word I don't even know if it's a word
but it's the word it's the word I made
up or amusing depending on whether you
can find it in a dictionary but there's
a back and forth nature to it so if you
look at a baby and a baby learns to walk
they don't just like crawl then one day
stand up and walk and then never crawl
again
that's not how we learn
right we don't learn all at once we
learned by going back and forth and in
fact what they know is that when that
back and forth doesn't happen like
particularly in babies crawling that
their brain develops differently and
it's not a good thing if you pull a
butterfly out of out of the Cocoon it
won't be able to fly like the what we
think to be struggle or friction that
pendulation of going back and forth
is really a necessary part of the
learning process and so what you'd
normally hear people talking about when
they're on the journey they're like man
it was doing so good and now it's all
gone you know like man it was like I was
feeling so blissed out and now all
that's gone how do I get it back
the other way to look at it is to say oh
cool that's gone I'm I'm in the learning
process this is how learning goes so
there's there's a way of looking at it
that that says oh cool I don't I it's
gone away which means that I am as much
in the learning process as when it's
there and I am getting closer because
it's gone I'm getting closer to
a life where that's fully understood and
fully recognized so that's a really
important thing that relates to
something else I've I've seen when
like when somebody starts going through
this journey and then all of a sudden
they start feeling more emotions that
they label as negative and they're like
oh no like I had done all this work and
now all that work is undone and I'm a
total mess yeah yeah
right which is not a that's beautiful
it's not at all the case one of the
things that could be happening is
they're just recognizing that they're
having the emotions instead of like just
taking them out on people when they
didn't recognize it before that's common
the other thing is that they're able to
handle them now right like one of the
things that I'll talk about often is
that like we'll do a lot of exercises
where people really increase their love
and you'll just notice this happen is
like when people can love themselves and
every part of themselves that was
unlovable comes to the surface to be
locked or the next the next wave of them
so it's like shining a light in the
water at night to attract cuttlefish
it's it's the more work we do the more
um attuned we get like if I make an
album which I did you know in my 20s I
made a rock and roll album I can't
listen to songs the same way before and
after I'm so much more sensitive to it
but that allows me to understand and
enjoy music in deeper and deeper ways
and so that's the same thing there's
that sensitivity
that's a beautiful Point another thing
to understand is that when you have big
jumps in development when these big
moments happen
there's a kind of a natural step that
happens which is
things go from unclear to clear to being
able to affect the change so easy way to
look at this is with kids
um you know the first thing infants they
don't even know it's their hand it's
hitting them it's scratching them they
don't even know it's theirs then they
recognize it's theirs but they can't
control it and then they can control
their hand Piaget calls this like I
think primary secondary and tertiary
circular reaction I think is the
is a terminology for it but that doesn't
happen just with the use of our hands it
happens like when people like fully
access for the first time
let's say
um their emotional intelligence or their
somatic intelligence or their awareness
like if they're finding that moment of
seeing that they are their awareness
um oftentimes you can't even talk
they're like what's going on and they
like try to reconstruct their life
because they're like well everything I
believe just gone what the hell's going
on and that's the way it works it's like
they've walked into this new world that
they can't control and they can't even
identify the parts of
but slowly you just hang out in the
world and everything takes care of
itself just like it does with an infant
you know so if you don't get scared
about it and you're just like okay yep I
don't know anything and I don't have to
reconstruct anything you know pretty
soon you're talking from that place so
that's another thing to know
development moves like a corkscrew I
think that's really important so if you
think about a corkscrew or a stock
market it's kind of like you're moving
up into the right in human development
just like a stock market you're moving
ahead but there's like it's like a
corkscrew and every time you're at the
bottom of that Corkscrew it's like daddy
issues and every time you're at the top
it's mommy issues and
and then you can have abandonment issues
or whatever but you have these core
things going through your lights and
your life and you're refining them and
it's they're becoming more and more
subtle and more and more different as
you become more and more sensitive so
that you can notice more and more of the
pain and agitation that you're feeling
what people often say is like I thought
I dealt with all my dad issues and it's
like
you know before Awakening bad issues
after Awakening at that issues like yeah
that's just I was just going to say
there's that one meme where it's like
before Awakening and there's a child
with a boot on his face and then after
Awakening it's a child with a boot on
his face but you can see it zoomed out
and he's holding the boot
to his face
I haven't seen that that's great yeah
yeah I would say after Awakening he's
loving the fact that he's putting his
own boot on his face and yeah and you
know and there's yeah that's unclear to
clear part I was like oh I'm putting
this on boot on my face and the
corkscrew is like oh these are all the
different ways I put the boot on my face
yeah and it's kind of the same way each
time around but I just keep finding more
and more subtle ways to heal it yeah
that comes back to that pendulation
which is like wait I thought I'd dealt
with all this before how am I well you
know sometimes you're just record you're
just seeing the new spin the new turn on
the corkscrew right a television show
isn't enjoyable if it's just everybody's
celebrating the whole show if you can
enjoy being in the not clear as well as
the clear if you can enjoy the corkscrew
you know there's this great um metaphor
and truth there's it's kind of it's not
a metaphor in in a way they know that if
two people are on a roller coaster and
they're going down same exact experience
and one of them is like woohoo and one
of them is like oh my God I'm so scared
and you go into their neurochemistry
like what they know is that like one of
them is releasing the one that's scared
is releasing carcinogenic chemicals into
their body and the other one is
releasing anti-carcinogenic chemicals
into their body
the exact same experience can can be
used to destroy somebody or to heal
somebody it's that you're going to be on
the roller coaster ride how do you enjoy
it that's the question how do you allow
enjoyment to happen that's the real
question
the last thing to think about on this is
we have our three brains you know you we
can call them the head the heart and the
gutter the human the mammalian and the
reptilian
um or the nervous system and the
emotional and the intellectual
they limit each other you know even
though they're really all one that if
you're really developed on your
intellectual side and you're not
developed on your emotional side
um it's like having three pencils
attached by rubber bands and one can get
only so high if one is so low and the
most bang you're gonna get for your buck
is to move the low one Higher because it
gives everything else the most
flexibility
so it's just important to know that if
if the path that you're working on has
stopped working you know you're you're
probably neglected one of the sides of
yourself one of the parts of yourself so
that's a really important thing to know
so tell me about enjoying those things
like because this process we've just
discussed is that there's going to be
pendulation you're just going to go from
like oh I'm Healed so oh I'm still a
total wreck and corkscrewing through the
same problems over and over in different
ways spending a lot of time feeling
unclear and then playing whack-a-mole
with these three
three uh like parts of our nervous
system how do we enjoy this process
yeah a good story for my life was that
you know there was this time when we got
kicked out of a house for and at the
time it felt like very unjust reasons
and in retrospect it was just it wasn't
a match and you know it was a long time
ago and
and every time I saw the people involved
or the house it just like this knot in
my stomach just was so
there
and it would come and go like all
emotions do they come in waves and at
some point I'm like oh cool there's
something there that I get to learn from
and it got to the point where like I
would literally drive by the house to
hope that that feeling would come back
so I could be with it and I could love
it
and I could spend time with that I could
attend to it I learned how to enjoy the
thing that I thought was uncomfortable
that's critical and that that's what it
is it is to
it is to not buy in I mean even this
story is a way to help you enjoy it
because if you buy into the pendulation
that you've lost it then it's very hard
to enjoy if you realize it's a learning
process and it's very easy to enjoy if
you are enjoying it the Learning Happens
quicker
it's like a virtuous loop it's like
the more we enjoy it the more we want to
approach it and the easier the whole
situation gets a feedback loop yeah that
feedback there exactly and and and like
clear to unclear is another great
example of it it's like
it's really easy to enjoy not knowing
it's really easy to enjoy being taken
and be like
you know get in a car with somebody and
and ask them to drive you somewhere but
not to tell you where they're driving
you
and not to tell you how long and just
see like that can be just as enjoyable
if not more enjoyable
right yeah it's it's really how do you
let the enjoyment in is the question and
all of this stuff that's really the key
to preparing for the spiritual journey
that's great something to be curious
about the entire way the entire time
yeah yeah now before we run out of time
I I would like to get back to touching
on these impediments and uh uh pitfalls
what kind of things can happen that can
block this whole process
one of the pitfalls is
um thinking that you should do anything
finding the wants behind your shirts and
letting your wants motivate you instead
of your shoulds motivate you in essence
the Journey of self-development is is
the discovering of the self it is
self-realization it is self-awareness
and a should in its nature is saying
that you need to be controlled that who
you are in general needs to be managed
controlled modified
your wants as there's a general trust in
who you are and and
if you think about it in a developmental
perspective you know an infant from zero
years old till seven like they don't
have any shoulds there is no should in
their brain I don't know for sure but I
bet there's a culture where there might
not ever be should ever but in that time
period they develop more than any other
time period in life
they just follow their wants so
following your wants is really the most
effective way to transform and following
your shoulds is the least effective way
and and to make it a should is really
just a doubt in
doubt of trust and of who you are the
other crazy thing about wants that I
think is really important is you know
you take a five-year-old and they want
something they're like no no yes no and
they throw a temper tantrum and
obviously when we get older we don't
want to throw temper tantrums and so we
say we shouldn't throw a temper tantrum
instead of getting in touch with the
fact that we don't want to thread like
that isn't we have iterated we have
evolved we now want something different
but we turn that into a should we change
that natural impetus inside us into
something that we should do resisting
resistance is another big one you know
people don't embrace the resistance so
they don't Embrace that intensity of a
resistance so there's a great phrase
that just says if you can't love it love
the resistance to not loving it and
that's really an important thing is that
don't fight the resistance that's just
more resistance another one how do you
not resist that resistance without
creating a new resistance around that
yeah right exactly yeah in a war with
yourself who's going to lose
exactly yeah there's no way to do it but
to drop it you can't you just have to
just stop
it's the only way
I think it was the first time it was
like 24 years old I went out to the
woods to fast and I was looking over
this Ridge line and I was noticing that
I was fighting myself and then I was
noticing that I was fighting myself to
stop fighting myself
and then I was noticing I was fighting
myself to stop fighting myself to stop
fighting myself and I was just like
yeah this isn't going to work
so I just stopped
and that was the first moment that I
realized that it's not a matter of
effort it's a matter of of acceptance
and it's a matter of not efforting it's
it's it's the stopping of the trying it
is the trust
another piece that's important is um
skepticism
is a there's two forms of skepticism one
is important one sucks
um for the spiritual journey the
important one is hey if it's not true
for you you should know it's not true
for you
and you shouldn't think that it's true
for you because some Guru said it or
because some Bible said it or you know
like if there is a truth then that truth
will be apparent in you and it will
resonate in you and you will know it
that so being skeptical
of Truth until you understand it fully
feel it is important
being skeptical
by prevents you from trying preventing
you from experimenting from preventing
you from being open enough to see a
truth
that level of skepticism is is you know
it's it's getting kneecapped it's like
getting your legs cut off in a race and
then spreading that to other people is
is violent another important one is just
notice when your future past living like
one of the biggest impediments is
somebody who's like either future living
by state seeking you know like oh I want
to be in that expansive State again oh I
want to be enjoy again oh I want to be
awakened oh I want to be future living
or or the opposite of that future living
which is like this is going to be so
hard oh my God I don't want to have to
do this work oh I have to feel my
emotions again this sucks uh like that
oh boy both of those things it's like
not enjoyable you know it is not even
just having having an idea of what
you're going to look like who you're
going to be once you've transformed yeah
exactly not enjoy projecting your
current self onto your future self like
oh if only I was perfect and all the
like ways that I current think I
currently think I should be you know
then I'll be done yeah exactly not
enjoyable it is like the moment is far
less enjoyable when you're thinking
about how you're going to end up and
then enjoying this moment like if you
think about the moments that you've like
enjoyed yourself most you probably
weren't thinking about like your
conclusion
you know you're probably some of the
times we enjoy ourselves most is when
the the proposed conclusion just
happened and so there's just nothing to
strive for in that moment and then
you're like ah and then you create
something to strive for and then you
don't enjoy yourself anymore then
there's like the future and past living
in the past
and that you know comparative mind is
like is a is a form of this of
who's better than who's worse is like
that requires future and past living to
be able to do that so yeah so anything
like that is also
these are their big pitfalls their
stalls in the journey
um and then the last thing about the
journey that I think is really important
like this this is the one that gets the
most is that there's this natural cycle
that happens that people go through and
I'm sure you can recognize it is like
you think to yourself oh I really want
to uh we'll pick anything I Really Wanna
I wanna I really want to stop smoking
we'll pick an easy one I really want to
stop smoking and then okay I gotta do
that I gotta really do it I got to do
why you should do that you should do
that you should do that you should are
you why aren't you doing it why aren't
you doing it okay okay I'm good and then
you do it and then as soon as you do it
you're like oh okay I hope this lasts I
hope this lasts I hope this lasts and
then it's like oh it's already going
away I already noticed that I'm wanting
cigarettes again oh oh [__] I had a
cigarette oh it fits all over I'm gonna
going back into oh quit [__] I said now
I'm smoking again I gotta quit smoking I
gotta quit smoking like that's the
routine
and they all of them rely on each other
and you can cut it off at any other
point but one of the easiest places to
cut it off is when that moment when you
actually have quit smoking or you have
stopped yelling at your wife or you have
stopped being a victim is to appreciate
it it's actually just appreciate that
moment and and to keep on appreciating
it
and instead of trying to hold on to it
right the idea that it's gonna go away
it is the thing that creates it going
away like that the only thing that's
really there to do is just to enjoy this
moment
um enjoy that it's it's gone and and and
the same thing can be said when you're
smoking like if you're in the middle of
smoking a pack a day it's like how do
you enjoy each cigarette like how do you
enjoy the hell out of yelling at your
wife if you're gonna do it
because nobody really enjoys yelling at
their wife so if you can really enjoy
loving it yelling at your wife I bet the
way you yell at your wife will change if
not go away
that kind of circles back to a lot of
the goal isn't for things to go away is
to just watch how they shift and how
they change and like what is the impulse
behind the behavior
trying to be
rather than what we our resistance
changes into
and so like all of these impediments
that you've just listed all seem like
different forms of resistance and so I
just want to ask you how can you enjoy
resistance so you just pointed to
something which is really great which is
if you want yourself to change it slows
down the process one is the wrong word
if you
if you're getting angry and you are
trying to change the fact that you get
angry that is a slower process than if
you love your anger and you invite your
anger in and you welcome your anchor
that is a far quicker process
unless you wait unless you start doing
it to try to make it go away like I'm
going to welcome my anger to make it go
away then it doesn't work anymore I'm
not saying welcome your anger at people
I'm just saying welcome the experience
of anger that one feels when they're
angry so I'm not suggesting to go and be
angry at people but to welcome your
anger
to accept it to love it
to express it in a way that's safe it
doesn't create more shame so I just want
to point that what you said was
brilliant in that and then I think your
question was
how do you enjoy resistance yeah and
that's that goes back to that that
statement of if you can't love the thing
if you can't love the anger love your
resistance to the anger
how do you enjoy resistance how do you
love your resistance this is the whole
question of the spiritual search and the
whole way to prepare
is how do you enjoy this process
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]